.TH OAKLISP 1 "1988 April 1"
.UC 4

.SH NAME
oaklisp \- Our implementation of Oaklisp
.br
oakliszt \- The Oaklisp file compiler
.br
scheme \- Oaklisp with R3RS compatibility package

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B oaklisp
[switches ...]
.br
.B oakliszt
file [locale [switches ...]]
.br
.B scheme
[switches ...]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Oaklisp
is an object-oriented dialect of Scheme.  This implementation is
highly portable, compiling to a virtual machine which is emulated by a
C program.  Nevertheless, reasonable speed is achieved through a
variety of sophisticated techniques.

.SH SWITCHES
.ta \w'-d -b  'u
.br
\fB-h x\fP	Set newspace size (in bytes) to x; default is 1Mb.
.br
\fB-Q\fP	Suppress all gc related output.
.br
\fB-d -b\fP	Dump the world when \fIoaklisp\fP stops itself.
.br
\fB-G\fP	Perform a full gc before dumping the world.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
If none of these are set
.I Oaklisp
will still work correctly.  Users compiling long files sometimes set
OAKLISZT to "-h 2m" in their initialization files.

.ta \w'OAKLISZT   'u
OAKPATH	Parent directory of the system.  No trailing /.
.br
OAKLISP	Switches for
.I oaklisp,
.I oakliszt,
and
.I scheme.
.br
OAKLISZT	Switches for
.I oakliszt
alone.
.br
OAKSCHEME	Switches for
.I scheme
alone.

.SH FILES
.ta \w'  lib/oaklisp.olc   'u
  etc/emulator	Virtual machine emulator.
.br
  lib/oaklisp.%%	Vanilla boot image.
.br
  lib/oaklisp.%%c	Boot image including compiler.
.br
  lib/oaklisp.%%z	Batch compiler boot image.
.br
  lib/oaklisp.%%s	R3RS compatible boot image.
.br
where %% is either
.I ol
or
.I lo
for big-endian or little-endian machines, respectively.

.SH REFERENCES
.I The Oaklisp Language and Implementation Manuals
are available by anonymous FTP from CS.CMU.EDU in
/afs/cs.cmu.edu/user/bap/ftpable/oaklisp/, or by AFS, or in hardcopy
form by sending email to technical_reports@cs.cmu.edu, or physical
mail to Documentation-Computer Science, School of Computer Science,
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890.

.I The Implementation of Oaklisp
is a chapter in
.I Topics in Advanced Language Implementation
edited by Peter Lee, MIT Press, 1991.

.I Oaklisp: an Object-Oriented Dialect of Scheme
appears in the journal
.I Lisp and Symbolic Computation
volume 1 number 1, published by Klewer Associates, May 1988.

.I Oaklisp: an Object-Oriented Scheme
.I with First Class Types
appeared in the ACM conference OOPSLA-86, whose proceedings were
published as a special issue of
.I SIGPLAN Notices.

An article on the Oaklisp garbage collector is in press at CACM.

.I The Revised^n Report on Scheme
is also a useful piece of documentation, and is widely available,
both online, as an MIT technical report, and in SIGPLAN Notices.


.SH DISTRIBUTION
The
.I Oaklisp
copyright belongs to its authors.  It is distributed under the
.I GNU General Public License version 2, June 1991
a copy of which is included in the
.I Oaklisp
distribution in the file
.I COPYING.
For further information or to make alternate arrangements, contact the
authors, who are reasonable people.


.SH BUGS
Floating point numbers are not supported.  Rationals can be used to
make up for this lack, as rationals can be told to print in floating
point format, and floating point format input can be made to read as
rational numbers.  (There are a couple floating point implementations,
but they are not merged into the distributed release.)

In contrast to the error handling system, which is Industrial
Strength, the debugger is virtually nonexistent.

There is no foreign function interface for loading and calling C
routines from a running Oaklisp.  (Again, there are a couple
implementations of foreign function interfaces which are not merged
in.)

Bug reports and enhancements should be sent to
Barak_Pearlmutter@CS.CMU.EDU or, for those without access to computer
mail,
.br
.nf
	Barak Pearlmutter
	Siemens Corporate Research
	755 College Road East
	Princeton, NJ  08540
.fi

.SH AUTHORS
Kevin Lang and Barak Pearlmutter.
